Course Syllabus 
CS/SE 2340.003–Computer Architecture
Fall2025
Course Information
Prerequisites: CE/CS/TE 1337 or equivalent, and CE/CS/TE 2305 or equivalent.
Class Time: Monday, and Wednesday, 10:00am - 11:15am (August 25, 2025-December 9, 2025)
Class Location: ECSS 2.311
Contact Information
Instructor: Dr. Wafa Jaffal
Email: wafa.jaffal@utdallas.edu
Office: ECSS 4.201 (Virtual via MS team)
Office Hours: M/W 12:00-1:00 pm, or by appointment (in-person or via MS-Teams)
Grader:
Grader Email: 
Class Resources
eLearning: The course website is hosted on eLearning, where you can access the syllabus, lecture slides, assignments, quizzes, grades, and announcements. You are responsible for checking the website regularly for any updates or changes.
The course will be in person for lectures and discussions, and via MS teams if there is a need. You will need a stable internet connection, a webcam, and a microphone to participate. The MS Teams Invite will be posted on your team’s calendar.
Email the grader for homework grading related questions only.
Course Description
This course introduces the basic concepts and principles of computer architecture, including instruction set design, datapath and control, pipelining, memory hierarchy, input/output, and parallelism. The course also covers the performance evaluation and optimization of computer systems, as well as the trade-offs between hardware and software. The course will use MIPS as an example of a RISC architecture, and will involve programming in assembly language.
Student Learning Objectives/Outcomes
By the end of this course, you will be able to:
have an ability to represent numbers in and convert between decimal, binary, and hexadecimal and perform calculations using 2's complement arithmetic 
understand the role of compilers, assemblers, and linkers and how programs are translated into machine language and executed 
be able to program efficiently in an assembly level instruction set, including the use of addressing modes and data types 
be able to write a fully functional, stand-alone medium size assembly language program (200~300 lines of code, e.g. a word-count program) 
understand the basic model of a computer including the datapath, control, memory, and I/O components
be able to demonstrate comprehension of a pipelined architectures including datapaths and hazards
understand the memory hierarchy including caches and virtual memory 
be able to demonstrate comprehension of computer performance measures and their estimation
Required Textbook
The required textbook for this course is:
Book: David A. Patterson and John L. Hennessy, Computer Organization and Design: The Hardware/Software Interface, 6th Edition, Patterson and Hennessey, Morgan-Kaufmann, 2021.Make sure that you get the correct edition (for MIPS).
RISC ASSEMBLER/SIMULATOR : This course uses the MARS MIPS assembler and simulator. MARS is available, free, for download from the Internet through the site:http://courses.missouristate.edu/kenvollmar/mars/.
You are expected to read the assigned chapters before each class, and to bring the textbook to class for reference. The textbook also contains exercises and problems that you can use for self-study and practice.
Class Schedule
The following is a tentative schedule of the topics to be covered in this course, along with the corresponding textbook chapters and dates of the assignments and quizzes. The schedule is subject to change depending on the pace and progress of the class. Any changes will be announced on eLearning and during the class:


Required Textbook & SW
The required textbook for this course is:
Book: David A. Patterson and John L. Hennessy, Computer Organization and Design: The Hardware/Software Interface, 6th Edition, Patterson and Hennessey, Morgan-Kaufmann, 2021.Make sure that you get the correct edition (for MIPS).
*You are expected to read the assigned chapters before each class, and to bring the textbook to class for reference. The textbook also contains exercises and problems that you can use for self-study and practice.

Other required Course Materials (SW):
It is assumed you are familiar with the PC environment, can create and edit text
files, run programs, etc.
DOWNLOAD JAVA
You will need to download Java for your platform by going to this website
https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/
Download Java before you go to the next step to install MARS.
MARS RISC ASSEMBLER/SIMULATOR
The programs will be in assembly language for the MIPS processor. This course uses
the MARS MIPS assembler and simulator. MARS is available, free, for download from
eLearning.
The MARS simulator can assemble MIPS assembly language source files, load and
run them with a users console window for input/output, and debug them if they do
not work properly.
Special instructions on how to install MARS onto a MAC
You need to allow Full Disk Access in your System Preferences in macOS. Here they mention that you need to search for 'JavaLauncher.app'. This is an issue due to macOS changes with security management. To give Full Disk Access to JAR files on macOS:
1. Go to System Preferences.
2. Click on Security and Privacy.
3. Search for 'Full Disk Access'.
4. Click on the lock at the bottom left to be able to make changes.
5. Click on the '+' icon at the bottom left of the FDA panel and a Finder prompt will appear.
6. Go to System/Library/CoreServices/JavaLauncher.app
7. Select the JavaLauncher.app and click 'Open'
Course & Instructor Policies
Assignments must be turned in on the due date, by 11:59 pm (The link to submit will expire). Submit via eLearning and don’t submit via email.
Late assignments are deducted by 20% if prior permission has been granted due to extenuating circumstances.
No Makeup for Quizzes under any circumstances.
Makeup exams are not given unless prior permission has been granted due to extenuating circumstances.
There are no extra credit points or do-overs in this class.
You are expected to attend all classes, participate in discussions, and complete all assignments and quizzes on time.
You are expected to follow the academic integrity policy of the university, and to avoid any form of cheating, plagiarism, or collusion. Any violation of the policy will result in a zero grade for the assignment, quiz, or exam, and may also lead to further disciplinary actions.
You are expected to respect the instructor, the TA, and your fellow classmates, and to maintain a professional and courteous behavior in class and online. Any form of harassment, discrimination, or disruption will not be tolerated.
You are encouraged to seek help from me if you have any questions or difficulties with the course material, assignments, or quizzes. 
You are responsible for checking your email, and eLearning regularly for any course-related announcements or updates.
Grading Policy
The grade will be based on a weighted score calculated by using the following table:

Grades will be assigned according to the following table:
		





Exams: There will be three exams during the course: two midterms and a final exam. Up to 4 pages (not sheets) of handwritten cheat sheets can be used during an exam, but no books or slides are allowed. The midterm exams will be limited to material covered during the immediate unit, but the final exam is comprehensive. Test material will be taken mainly from classroom lectures.
The exams will be hosted either in test centers or in class rooms via lockdown browsers. 
https://ets.utdallas.edu/elearning-services/instructors/remote-teaching-resources/lockdown-browser/

Programming assignments grading:
Code Development 30% (compile w/o error)
Program Execution 20% (run successfully)
Program Design 25% (conform to spec)
Documentation 15% (program, comments)
Coding Style 10% (clear, efficient)



